---
layout: post
title: "I Ching, the Seventh Wing"
categories: maxims
---

#### *I Ching* 易經 (Book of Changes). Wen Yan / Commentary on the Words of the Text, the Seventh Wing. Hexagram Qian, the Creative

##### [*The I Ching or Book of Changes*, the Richard Wilhelm Translation rendered into English by Cary F. Baynes, third ed., Bollingen Series XIX, Princeton University Press, 1967

[Book III, Part I, 1. Ch’ien / The Creative, On nine in the second place, d.8, p. 380](https://yijing.website/Pages/deTienVleugels.php#Qian)

> The superior man learns in order to gather material; he questions in order to sift it. Thus he becomes generous in nature and kindly in his actions. In the Book of Changes it is said: "Dragon appearing in the field. It furthers one to see the great man." For he has the qualities of a ruler.

##### *The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Confucianism. Part II. The Yî King*, translated by James Legge, The Sacred Books of the East, Volume XVI, Clarendon Press, 1882. Appendix IV. Section I. Chapter VI. 31. [p. 416](https://jainqq.org/explore/007676/443)

[Chinese Text Project -> Book of Changes -> ䷀乾 -> 20 文言](https://ctext.org/dictionary.pl?if=en&id=81907)

> The superior man learns and accumulates the results of his learning; puts questions, and discriminates among those results; dwells magnanimously and unambitiously in what he has attained to; and carries it into practice with benevolence. What the Yi says, 'The dragon appears in the field:--it will be advantageous to meet with the great man,' has reference to the virtuous qualities of a ruler (as thus described).

> *君子學以聚之，問以辯之，寬以居之，仁以行之。《易》曰「見龍在田、利見大人」，君德也。*

